35.2

€ 60,00

AC-35-2

ISSN 1120-6861
e-ISSN 2385-1953
ISBN 978-88-9285-298-3
e-ISBN 978-88-9285-299-0

A RCHE OLOG IA
E CALCOLATORI

2024

ARCHEOLOGIA
E CALCOLATORI

35.2
2024
All’Insegna del Giglio

ARCHEOLOGIA E CALCOLATORI

CNR – DIPARTIMENTO SCIENZE UMANE E SOCIALI, PATRIMONIO CULTURALE
ISTITUTO DI SCIENZE DEL PATRIMONIO CULTURALE
Rivista annuale open access e peer reviewed
fondata da Mauro Cristofani e Riccardo Francovich
già diretta da Paola Moscati (1990-2022)
Comitato Scientifico: Paola Moscati (coordinatore), Giovanni Azzena, Robin B. Boast, Julian
Bogdani, Rodolfo Brancato, Francisco Burillo Mozota, Francesca Buscemi, Alessandra
Caravale, Christopher Carr, Martin O.H. Carver, Enrico Crema, Francesco D’Andria,
Alessandro Di Ludovico, François Djindjian, James E. Doran, José Antonio Esquivel
Guerrero, Virginie Fromageot-Laniepce, Simone Garagnani, Andrea Gaucci, Antonio
Gottarelli, Maria Pia Guermandi, Anne-Marie Guimier-Sorbets, Ian Hodder, F. Roy
Hodson, Stephen Kay, Donna C. Kurtz, Emma Lazzeri, Daniele Manacorda, Costanza
Miliani, Tito Orlandi, Clive R. Orton, Maria Cecilia Parra, Alessandra Piergrossi, AlbanBrice Pimpaud, Jonathan Prag, Xavier Rodier, Francesco Roncalli di Montorio, Bernardo
Rondelli, Irene Rossi, Grazia Semeraro, Paolo Sommella, Gianluca Tagliamonte, Marco
Valenti, Marc Vander Linden, Valeria Vitale
Direttore responsabile: Alessandra Caravale
Redazione ed Editing: Claudio Barchesi, Letizia Ceccarelli, Antonio D’Eredità, Andrea Di
Renzoni, Giulia Facchin, Giacomo Mancuso, Erika Tedino
Policy and Guidelines: http://www.archcalc.cnr.it/pages/guidelines.php
Autorizzazione del presidente del Tribunale di Firenze n. 3894 del 6/11/1989
Indirizzo Redazione: Rivista «Archeologia e Calcolatori», CNR – ISPC, Area della Ricerca
di Roma 1, Via Salaria Km 29,300, 00015 Monterotondo Stazione (RM)
Tel. +39.06.90672670 – Fax +39.06.90672818
E-mail: redazioneac.ispc@ispc.cnr.it
http://www.archcalc.cnr.it/
Edizione e distribuzione: Edizioni ALL’INSEGNA DEL GIGLIO s.a.s.,
Via Arrigo Boito 50-52, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Tel. +39.055.6142675
E-mail: redazione@insegnadelgiglio.it – ordini@insegnadelgiglio.it
https://www.insegnadelgiglio.it/

ARCHEOLOGIA
E CALCOLATORI

35.2
2024

All’Insegna del Giglio

The publication of this journal’s issue was funded by H2IOSC Project - Humanities and cultural
Heritage Italian Open Science Cloud funded by the European Union NextGenerationEU - National
Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP) - Mission 4 “Education and Research” Component 2 “From
research to business” Investment 3.1 “Fund for the realization of an integrated system of research
and innovation infrastructures” Action 3.1.1 “Creation of new research infrastructures strengthening
of existing ones and their networking for Scientific Excellence under Horizon Europe” - Project
code IR0000029 - CUP B63C22000730005. Implementing Entity CNR.

Realizzazione grafica della sovracoperta di Marcello Bellisario
Rivista «Archeologia e Calcolatori» (ISSN 1120-6861, e-ISSN 2385-1953)
ISBN 978-88-9285-298-3, e-ISBN 978-88-9285-299-0
© 2024 – All’Insegna del Giglio s.a.s. – www.insegnadelgiglio.it
Sesto Fiorentino (FI), dicembre 2024
Stampa, BDprint
Abbonamento 2024: 2 volumi, 34.1 e 34.2, € 96,00.
Spedizione: Italia, gratuita; estero, a carico del destinatario.
https://www.insegnadelgiglio.it/categoria-prodotto/abbonamenti/

INDICE

ArcheoFOSS 2023. Proceedings of the 17 t h In ter national
Conference on Open Software, Hardware, Processes, Data and
Formats in Archaeological Research (Turin, 12-13 December
2023), edited by Anna Maria Marras, Alessio Palmisano, Rosina
Leone, Vito Messina
Anna Maria Marras, Alessio Palmisano, Rosina Leone, Vito Messina,
Introduction

11

Anna Maria Marras, Foreword. Open Source, Open Science and
communities in archaeology

15

Piergiovanna Grossi, Serge Plata, Amplifying archaeological outreach:
the impact of Wikipedia and collaborative initiatives on cultural tourism 19
Valeria Acconcia, Valeria Boi, Annalisa Falcone, Ilaria Di Cocco,
Mirella Serlorenzi, Dati aperti in archeologia: una riflessione sullo
stato dell’arte nell’ambito del Ministero della Cultura

29

Stefano Costa, Eleonora Fornelli, Anna Lorenzatto, Gennaro
Iovino, Chiara Panelli, Fiorenza Proto, Renata Esposito, The
DSC authority file: a link between fieldwork and finds

39

Zachary Batist, Does not compute! Accounting for social and situated
experiences while integrating and analyzing obsidian sourcing data

47

Lucia Marsicano, Marco Montanari, Entertainment buildings in the
Roman empire: a quantitative approach

55

Florian Thiery, Allard W. Mees, Sharing Linked Open Data with
domain-specific data-driven community hubs – archaeology.link in
NFDI4Objects

63

Alessio Palmisano, Andrea Titolo, The good, the bad and the ugly:
evaluating Open Science practices in archaeology

75

Vittorio Lauro, Harmonizing photogrammetric approaches for
Cultural Heritage preservation: a methodological framework
and comparative analysis

85

Florian Thiery, Fiona Schenk, Stefanie Baars, Dealing with doubts: site
georeferencing in archaeology and in the geosciences

97

Andrea Titolo, Alessio Palmisano, Using Kart and GitHub for versioning
and collaborating with spatial data in archaeological research
107
Federica Vacatello, Andrea Vannini, ‘Open’ architecture of UAVIMALS
prototype and its archaeological use
119

Augusto Palombini, Metaverse and ‘the Italian job’: closed and open
models of virtual worlds in Cultural Heritage domain

129

Diogo Menezes Costa, The Abade Artificial Archaeological Site Project

137

Pablo Sicre-González, José Ortiz-García, Virtual recreation as a valid
scientific representation for raising public awareness

147

Antonio Rodríguez Alcalá, John F. Chuchiak IV, Zoraida Raimúndez
Ares, Maria Felicia Rega, Luis Díaz de León, Hans B. Erickson,
An open look to the past: virtual and immersive approach to study
157
inquisitorial Autos de Fe in colonial Mexico and Guatemala
Simone Berto, Emanuel Demetrescu, Enzo Cocca, Extended Matrix
Manager: an open tool for EM based knowledge graphs management

167

Paola Frigerio, Caterina Previato, Emanuel Demetrescu, Extended
Matrix Narratives: teaching and engaging through the past

177

Sara Fabbri, Reviving the past: utilizing the Extended Matrix tool for
Deacon Thomas Dayr virtual reconstruction

187

Lorenzo Gigli, Marco Montanari, Lucia Marsicano, Engaging
the public: reviving history through the Social Simulacra model in
participatory Public History projects

197

Luca Bezzi, Alessandro Bezzi, Rupert Gietl, Cicero Moraes, Giuseppe
Naponiello, Sara Airò, Andreas Putzer, Elena Silvestri, Digital
twins of archaeological finds: open source technologies applied to 3D
203
scanning
Emanuela Faresin, Vanessa Baratella, Margarita Gleba, Non-invasive
methodologies for the study of mineralised textile traces in Iron Age
215
contexts
Filippo Diara, Data extraction from 3D scanning: post-processing filtering
for analytic and informative models of small archaeological finds

225

Daniele Bursich, Scansioni 3D di piccoli reperti per il progetto ArCOA
(Archivi e Collezioni dell’Oriente Antico)

235

Eleonora Iacopini, Zotero2Map: sviluppo di un nuovo strumento ITC per
la condivisione e la pubblicazione dei dati bibliografici per la ricerca
storica e archeologica

245

Marco Montanari, Lucia Marsicano, Simplifying contextualization of
3D model archives in webGIS: 3DModelCommons

255

Elena Marangoni, Oriana Bozzarelli, I progetti Wikimedia e gli enti
culturali

263

*

*

*

Linking Pasts and Sharing Knowledge. Mapping Archaeological
Heritage, Legacy Data Integration and Web Technologies for
Modelling Historical Landscapes (Naples, 13th-14th November
2023), edited by Rodolfo Brancato, Julian Bogdani, Valeria Vitale
Julian Bogdani, Rodolfo Brancato, Valeria Vitale, Introduction

275

Margherita Azzari, Paolo Liverani, Landscape visualisation and
modelling

277

Mirella Serlorenzi, Ascanio d’Andrea, Carlo Rosa, Paolo Rosati,
Daniele Sepio, Preliminary results of the archaeological potential map
in SITAR
285
Giuseppina Renda, Carmine Civale, Sabrina Mataluna, Pacifico
Cofrancesco, The GISTArc webGIS for the accessibility and sharing
of archaeological data in Campania
299
Valentina Limina, Challenges and benefits in modelling ancient landscapes
complexity through resilience and antifragility. RELOAD: a project on
liminality in Northern Tuscany
311
Julian Bogdani, Domizia D’Erasmo, Old data, old methodology and new
research. A case study of legacy data integration from the Cestrine
Region, Epirus

323

Jacopo Turchetto, Elisa Consolo, Giacomo Moro, Mapping the
archaeological landscapes of San Basilio (Ariano nel Polesine, Rovigo) 333
Barbara E. Borg, Eleonora Iacopini, IN-ROME – The INscribed city:
urban structures and interaction in imperial Rome

343

Valeria Vitale, Katherine McDonough, Labels and symbols: using text
on maps to investigate the antiquities on the ordnance survey maps of
Great Britain

355

Nicola Laneri, Chiara Pappalardo, Marianna Nicolosi-Asmundo,
Daniele Francesco Santamaria, Godscapes: towards a model of
material religion in the second millennium BCE Levant via Semantic
Web ontologies

363

Sergio G. Russo, Geostatistical mapping of pottery variation: the northern
lands of western Asia during the Middle Bronze Age

371

Andrea D’Andrea, Legacy data or just archaeological data?

381

Rodolfo Brancato, Veronica Ferrari, Immacolata Ditaranto,
Pasquale Merola, Irene Rossi, Investigating resilient Roman
agricultural landscapes in southern Italy. An integrated and open IT
approach to modeling centuriation

387

Laura Ebanista, Use and processing of multispectral images in proximity
remote sensing

401

Claudia Lamanna, Evaluation of SfM and LiDAR technology for
mapping inscribed artifacts. Preliminary observations starting from
the research project ‘Ravenna and its Late Antique and Medieval
Epigraphic Landscape’

411

Daniele De Simone, Graziano William Ferrari, 3D LiDAR modeling
with iPhone Pro in an archaeo-spelaeologic context. Results and
prospects

421

Giuseppe Luongo, GIS integration of heterogeneous data for the
archaeological topography of the ‘Acquedotto del Paradiso’, Syracuse

431

Giulia Marsili, Digital strategies for enhancing Cultural Heritage: the Villa
del Casale of Piazza Armerina Project, from legacy data to digital
445
ecosystem
Paola Moscati, Concluding remarks: looking back and moving forward to
the openness and interaction of knowledge
*

*

455

*

The H2IOSC Project and its impact on digital antiquity within
the E-RIHS infr astructure – II, Special section edited by
Alessandra Caravale, Paola Moscati, Irene Rossi
Alessandra Caravale, Paola Moscati, Irene Rossi, Advancements of
the H2IOSC Project: enhancement of digital resources in the Cultural
Heritage field targeting archaeology and epigraphy. Introduction to the
Special section
463
Nicolò Paraciani, A new website for the journal «Archeologia e Calcolatori» 471
Francesca Buscemi, Leonarda Fazio, Verso la costituzione di linee guida
per l’esposizione di risorse visuali negli aggregatori europei

483

Irene Rossi, Chiara Salvador, An observatory of epigraphic resources on
the web: the Open Digital Epigraphy Hub

503

Recensioni:
D. Manacorda, Triangolo virtuoso. Tre parole chiave per l’archeologia
(Giulia Facchin), p. 525; M. Danese, N. Masini, M. Biscione, Gli Open
Data per il patrimonio culturale: aspetti teorici ed esperienze in Italia
(Giacomo Mancuso), p. 528

LINKING PASTS AND SHARING KNOWLEDGE .
MAPPING ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE ,
LEGACY DATA INTEGR ATION
AND W EB TECHNOLOGIES
FOR MODELLING HISTORICAL LANDSCAPES
(NAPLES, 13 T H -14 T H NOVEMBER 2023)

Edited by
Rodolfo Brancato, Julian Bogdani, Valeria Vitale

The publication of the section dedicated to the Proceedings of the international Conference Linking
Pasts and Sharing Knowledge. Mapping Archaeological Heritage, Legacy Data Integration and Web
Technologies for Modelling Historical Landscapes, Naples, 13th-14th November 2023 was made
possible thanks to the support of Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici-Università di Napoli Federico II
(PRIN 2022 In.Res.Agri, Project Code 2022SMJCHX, CUP: B53D23001910006) and Sapienza
Università di Roma.

Archeologia e Calcolatori
35.2, 2024, 381-386
doi 10.19282/ac.35.2.2024.40

LEGACY DATA OR JUST ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA?
1. Introduction
The proliferation of digital information resources is generating a phenomenon in every field of human knowledge commonly identified as ‘datafication’ (Mayer-Schonberger, Cukier 2013). Originally, the concept
described the tendency to transform every aspect of life into data. Later, the
term was used to define behaviours that pushed towards greater automation in
handling large collections of data. ‘Data is the new oil’ has become over time
the paradigm of information players (Google, Microsoft, Amazon, etc.) that
produces added value on data collection and exploitation. The introduction
of Big Data and, more generally, the need to train models for artificial intelligence, have modified the initial idea of ‘datafication’, which today coincide
with a particular method of seeing, representing, discovering, and exploring
information. Thus, data is replacing the methodologies aimed at producing,
managing, and interpreting them.
The diffusion and use of data in different fields, such as scientific and
educational, have led to a paradigm shift characterized by intensive data
use and the possibility of automatically extracting and inferring knowledge
from a vast collection of digital documents (Hey, Tansley, Tolle 2009).
This new form of science, based on the fundamental activity of capturing,
curating, and analysing data, aims not to propose simulative models but
to enable the scientific exploration of nearly infinite collections of records
available online, enhancing the analytical potential of each researcher.
To access the materials needed for their research, researchers should sift
through a digital library characterized by volumes, articles, reports, tables,
images, drawings, photographs, sorted according to different standards,
different languages, etc., and especially without a careful librarian capable
of preserving memory and trace of the contents. Computational sciences
increasingly support online research through the development of hardware
and software systems aimed at integrating resources on the web, overcoming
data fragmentation and heterogeneity; despite the encouraging technological
innovations, many of the proposed solutions are partial and not entirely
conclusive.
A significant impetus to the automatic processing of large amounts of
data comes primarily from the implementation of new ‘intelligence’ techniques aimed at countering international terrorism through a broader sharing
of decentralized databases (9/11 Commission Report, 2004). The need to
increase the quality of data traffic control on the Internet, often consisting
381

A. D’Andrea

of unstructured information, has accelerated the development of algorithms
capable of constructing aggregations of suspicious data (Biltgen, Ryan 2015).
The challenge in collecting and analysing data is assuming a central role
in the relationship between emerging technologies, raw information available
online, and the automatic extraction of content that can be grouped together.
Innovation, therefore, looks towards a new interdisciplinary interaction aimed at overcoming the thin boundary between physical and virtual reality.
Archaeological research has also been impacted by an explosion of digital
data, digitised or digitalized data from new and recent discovery or from old
archives. More generally, information technology has caused such a change
in researchers’ attitudes that it is thought that all archaeologists have become
digital, although differences persist in skills and in access to and use of data
(Morgan, Eve 2012). This contribution aims to explore a particular aspect
in the process of re-elaborating digital data in archaeological research, namely
that of legacy spatial data, which more generally we can identify in previous
studies, digital or paper, structured or unstructured, often built with now
outdated methodological approaches.
2. Data vs datafication in archaeology
Archaeological data plays a central role in research to the extent that
we speak of the formation of the archaeological record to indicate which
processes have produced that trace that the archaeologist subsequently records. While the theoretical and methodological debate seems to oscillate
between very divergent opinions on the nature of excavation and its related
archaeological documentation, some fixed points can be noted. Archaeology
is characterized by poorly defined variables, often mistakenly thought of as
data, derived from populations not always fully understood and from uncertain articulations between the entities whose logical relationships we seek to
understand (Chippindale 2000). Archaeological research often moves in a
marshy terrain characterized by uncertain boundaries, stagnant waters, muddy
soil, and with a particular vegetation and fauna. For these reasons that M.B.
Schiffer (1987) defines the archaeological record as the distorted reflection
of an object that was once part of a more comprehensive behavioural system
that we only partially reconstruct. According to I. Huvila (2017), data can be
recorded and organized from a dozen different perspectives, and to emphasize
the ambiguous and misleading nature of the variable in archaeological documentation, he coined the term MEAN (Miscellaneous Exceptional Arbitrary
Nonconformist).
Examining the consistency of the digital archaeological record, J. Huggett (2022) has recently listed some of the main incongruities that can be
synthesized as follows:
382

Legacy data or just archaeological data?

A – Tables, databases, relationships, texts can be incorporated within a
structured data model, reducing variability, or eliminating those descriptive
elements that do not fit the schema;
B – Raw data can be set aside in favour of processed data sets. The distinctions between primary, secondary, and tertiary data are lost by eliminating
the distinction from what was originally collected to what was subsequently
processed and interpreted;
C – The same data entities can be evidence of multiple phenomena.
Since data depends on the context of use and, at the same time, on
users’ beliefs, the results will always be highly complex, unstable, and
unpredictable. All the cautions expressed by researchers about digital data
and their use should warn archaeologists against uncritically accepting algorithms capable of automatically processing and aggregating large amounts
of data. Only careful analysis of the entire digitization process can truly
innovate the approach to excavation (Roosevelt et al. 2015), contributing, together with the increase in tools and sensors for data acquisition,
to a paradigm shift (Huggett 2015; Schmidt, Maverick 2020). In the
future, digitalization will simplify the work of archaeologists, who will
be able to focus on examining more general and theoretical issues rather
than organizing data. Despite the optimistic forecasts, outside of this promising scenario will remain the past excavations that preserve paper data
or collections of digital records coded with old programs and according
to outdated methods.
3. Legacy spatial archaeological data
Huggett (2018) has pointed out how the reuse of digital archives
involves data aggregation that creates new values, which at the end of the
process, however, can be more ambiguous and less transparent (Clarke
2016) in the absence of precise contextual data. The choice to use metadata
and paradata associated with archives certainly contributes to increasing
data understanding; however, the inherently unstable nature of any data
integration process makes the Big Data scenario an objective with uncertain outcomes. Processing large amounts of archaeological records from
different excavations and research necessarily entails a reconsideration
of data recording methods and archive creation. Such caution necessarily
increases when spatial data acquired at different times and with different
methodologies are reused.
A trend towards the adoption of automated computer means to make
efficient and effective use of large data sets was already present at the end of
1980s (Kvamme 1989). The pioneering use of databases to store and process large amounts of data was replaced by GIS systems, while in the same
383

A. D’Andrea

years CAD was established for the realization of topographic drawings and
graphic documentation of excavations, allowing for rapid updating of plans
and stratigraphy (Alperson-Afil 2019). The parallel development of GIS
and CAD technologies, both based on a common numerical representation
of information, has pushed industries towards greater integration between
the two systems. However, despite the development of interoperable formats,
migrating CAD drawings to GIS requires specific conceptualization, making
automatic conversion impossible. Adapting CAD files for GIS applications,
therefore, remains a challenging task, impossible to complete without substantial human intervention (Bibby, Ducke 2017). The difference between
the two systems lies in the connection between geometric entities and the
alphanumeric information associated with them. In particular, CAD produces
complex graphical maps but ignores the non-spatial attributes associated with
graphic entities. Therefore, reusing CAD data in GIS requires a reorganization of geometric and spatial information based on the identification and
construction of objects that transform geometric primitives into semantic
categories (walls, rooms, streets, buildings, etc.).
A test, conducted for the implementation of a GIS for the archaeological site of al-Balīd, ancient Zafar, in the Sultanate of Oman, confirmed the
difficulty in designing and creating an automatic path for importing and
managing a previous cartographic archive consisting mainly of CAD maps.
Over the last 70 years, several teams have investigated the area of Zafar, an
important Islamic-period maritime stopover located along the routes crossing
the Indian Ocean (D’andrea 2021). In 1995, a German mission, led by M.
Jansen (2015), was tasked with creating the archaeological park of the site.
At the end of the work, a substantial digital archive was produced, including
dozens of CAD files reproducing the archaeological area. In 2019, a research
group from the University of Naples L’Orientale resumed investigations in
the area with the aim, among others, of systematizing previous research and
creating a GIS that would collect previous site plans and drawings. The review of the CAD archive started from the analysis of the survey of the Great
Mosque, with the aim of verifying the accuracy of spatial information and the
possible migration to GIS. The table associated with the spatial information
present in QGIS lists 245 vectors that are not convertible automatically into
architectural and structural elements of the religious building without human
intervention. Only by reading the excavation reports is it possible to correctly
identify the individual components of the mosque (walls, columns, stairs,
thresholds, etc.) and build the corresponding objects in the GIS, referring, in
some parts, to distinct phases of the structure’s life cycle. The design of the
GIS inevitably pushed towards a re-reading of the entire cartographic archive
and, above all, of all the available archaeological documentation (graphic,
photographic, and textual).
384

Legacy data or just archaeological data?

4. Conclusion
The experience gained in the project of converting the graphic archive
of al-Balid, however partial, confirms the impossibility of designing an automatic treatment for the migration of CAD files into a GIS environment.
The Archaeology Data Service has initiated a large-scale migration process of
CAD files without, however, foreseeing a specific method for reusing digital
drawings in different software and applications (Green et al. 2016).
The challenge for a correct conversion of plans, sections, and elevations must start from the identification of represented objects and not simple
graphical entities. The category of spatial legacy data must be treated in the
same way as a traditional cartographic archive, requiring a reading, also
methodological, of all existing documentation. Only by following this path is
it possible to correctly interpret the information drawn by the archaeologist,
regardless of the format used, paper or CAD.
In the future, artificial intelligence will certainly provide new tools to
automatically associate digital or handwritten texts with plans, making all this
documentation readable by a machine (Fletcher 2023). However, pending
the transformation of legacy data into ‘reborn digital data’, we still need to
rely on the traditional methodology of spatial information processing, which
places human experience at the centre of analysis.
Andrea D’Andrea
Dipartimento Asia, Africa e Mediterraneo
Università degli Studi di Napoli L’Orientale
dandrea@unior.it
REFERENCES
Alperson-Afil N. 2019, Digitising the undigitized: Converting traditional archaeological records
into computerized, three-dimensional site reconstruction, «Journal of Graphic Information
System», 11, 747-765 (https://www.scirp.org/journal/paperinformation?paperid=97426).
Bibby D., Ducke B. 2017, Free and open-source software development in archaeology. Two
interrelated case studies: gvSIG CE and Survey2GIS, «Internet Archaeology», 43 (https://
doi.org/10.11141/ia.43.3).
Biltgen P., Ryan S. 2015, Activity-Based Intelligence: Principles and Applications, Boston-London, Artech House.
Chippindale C. 2000, Capta and data: On the true nature of archaeological information,
«American Antiquity», 65, 4, 605-612.
Clarke R. 2016, Big data, big risks, «Information Systems Journal», 26, 77-90 (https://doi.
org/10.1111/isj.12088).
D’Andrea A. 2021, Reconsidering the topography of al-Balid: A preliminary review of
the graphical documentation, «Annali Sezione Orientale», 81, 39-50 (https://doi.
org/10.1163/24685631-12340110).
Fletcher E.C. 2023, Creating a software methodology to analyze and preserve archaeological legacy data, «Advances in Archaeological Practice», 11, 2, 139-151 (https//doi.
org/10.1017/aap.2022.44).

385

A. D’Andrea

Green K., Niven K., Field G. 2016, Migrating 2 and 3D datasets: Preserving AutoCAD at
the Archaeology Data Service, «ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information», 5,
44 (https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi5040044).
Hey T., Tansley S., Tolle K. (eds.) 2009, The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific
Discovery, Washington, Microsoft Research.
Huggett J. 2015, Challenging digital archaeology, «Open Archaeology», 1, 1, 79-85 (https://
doi.org/10.1515/opar-2015-0003).
Huggett J. 2018, Reuse remix recycle: Repurposing archaeological digital data, «Advances
in Archaeological Practice», 6, 2, 93-104 (https://doi.org/10.1017/aap.2018.1).
Huggett J. 2022, Data legacies, epistemic anxieties, and digital imaginaries in archaeology,
«Digital», 2, 2, 267-295 (https://doi.org/10.3390/digital2020016).
Huvila I. 2017, Being FAIR. When archaeological information is MEAN: Miscellaneous,
exceptional, arbitrary, nonconformist, Presentation at the Centre for Digital Heritage
Conference (Leiden 2017) (http://www.istohuvila.se/node/526).
Kvamme K. 1989, Geographic Information Systems in regional archaeological research and
data management, in M.B. Schiffer (ed.), Archaeological Method and Theory, 1,
Tucson, University of Arizona Press, 139-203.
Jansen M. 2015, The archaeological park of Al-Baleed, Sultanate of Oman. Site atlas along
with selected Technical Reports 1995-2001, Muscat, Office of the Adviser to His Majesty
the Sultan for Cultural Affairs.
Mayer-Schonberger V., Cukier K. 2013, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How
We Live, Work, and Think, New York, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Morgan C., Eve S. 2012, DIY and Digital Archaeology: What are you doing to participate?,
«World Archaeology», 44, 4, 521-537.
Roosevelt C. H., Cobb P., Moss E., Olson B.R., Ünlüsoy S. 2015, Excavation is destruction
digitization: Advances in archaeological practice, «Journal of Field Archaeology», 40,
3, 325-346 (https://doi.org/10.1179/2042458215Y.0000000004).
Schiffer M.B. 1987, Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record, Albuquerque, University of New Mexico.
Schmidt S.C., Marwick B. 2020, Tool-driven revolutions in archaeological science, «Journal
of Computer Applications in Archaeology», 3, 1, 8-32 (https://doi.org/10.5334/jcaa.29).
The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks
upon the United States, 2004, Washington, Government Printing Office (https://www.
govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-911REPORT/pdf/GPO-911REPORT.pdf).
ABSTRACT
The world of research is currently undergoing a profound transformation, characterized by the extensive use of digital data available online. To optimize the utilization of
these resources, artificial intelligence offers researchers several tools capable of aggregating
both structured and unstructured information. The need to train algorithms to enhance
the use of artificial intelligence techniques in data classification has led to the creation of
structured datasets. However, it is not always possible to fully automate the transfer of data
to more modern environments without substantial human intervention, aimed at extracting
the implicit knowledge present in digital data. The category of CAD data appears to be
particularly challenging in terms of automated management of spatial resources. The use of
graphical entities for digital drawings, without semantically identified components, makes
automatic conversion into GIS extremely complex. The paper is based on a partial test
conducted on a cartographic archive that has been formed over 70 years of field research,
aiming to demonstrate the importance of prioritizing legacy spatial data, both digital and
non-digital, as archaeological data.

386

35.2

€ 60,00

AC-35-2

ISSN 1120-6861
e-ISSN 2385-1953
ISBN 978-88-9285-298-3
e-ISBN 978-88-9285-299-0

A RCHE OLOG IA
E CALCOLATORI

2024

ARCHEOLOGIA
E CALCOLATORI

35.2
2024
All’Insegna del Giglio

